From: Jason Eisner <jason@cs.jhu.edu>
Date: Fri, 17 Jun 2005 22:09:16 -0400

Report of ACL 2005 Publications Co-Chairs
Jason Eisner and Philipp Koehn
-----------------------------------------

Assembling ACL's publications has often been overwhelming, not only
for publications chairs, but also for the chairs of individual workshops.

We set out this year to streamline the daunting process.  It involves
about 15 proceedings volumes, each with its own program chair,
program, and front matter.  The various proceedings must be produced
in print, CD-ROM, and ACL Anthology forms, and are jointly indexed by
a BibTeX database and an author index.  All of the 300+ submitted
papers require copyright transfer agreements, and many of the papers
present problems with formatting, fonts, or metadata.  The metadata
include a mix of LaTeX, HTML, and Latin-1 encodings.  A serious
challenge is managing the many requests for corrections and special
handling that flow in throughout.

Our innovations were as follows:

1. Online instructions to authors for how to prepare their
   camera-ready papers (style files, paper size, font embedding,
   resolution and color of graphics, testing one's file).  

2. Final submission by authors via the START system.  Accepted authors
   were asked to simultaneously submit three things:

   a. Camera-ready PDF file.  This service was easy to add since START
      already provided it to some other conferences.

   b. Final metadata.  Accepted authors could use START to confirm or
      revise the paper title, author list, etc.

   c. Copyright agreement signature.  The submitting author
      electronically signed ACL's copyright transfer agreement by
      typing his or her name.  

   Paper shuffling was greatly reduced by this new facility, which was
   used by the main conference, poster/demo session, and almost all
   workshops.  Two or three workshop chairs chose to skip START and
   collect a., b., and c. manually, but they regretted it.

   In the case of c., we asked for hard copy only if the electronic
   signature was missing or appeared invalid.  Thanks to the ACL Exec
   for agreeing to allow this procedure.  We argued (not as lawyers)
   that these electronic signatures were legally pretty safe, thanks
   to recent legislation and case law, and that the risks to ACL were
   small in any case.

3. End-to-end PDF production.  We found a way to use pdflatex to
   assemble each proceedings volume as a single large PDF book.  
   Pages are automatically numbered.

   This has several advantages:

   a. It greatly reduces paper handling and the risk of error.  (In
      past years, it was up to the printer to concatenate individual
      papers in the correct order and number the pages.)  Crucially,
      it is possible to make even last-minute changes and inspect the
      resulting final volume.

   b. Beyond adding page numbers, we also added a small-type "citation
      stamp" at the bottom of each paper's first page, giving full
      bibliographic information for that paper and asserting ACL's
      copyright.  This follows the practice of many journals.  The
      citation stamp is convenient for readers who might otherwise
      lose track of the provenance of a xeroxed or online paper.

   c. We were able to translate and scale individual papers, giving
      the proceedings a more even look than in past years.  Many
      papers had incorrect margins and needed to be vertically or
      horizontally shifted.

   d. The resulting single PDF volume is also a convenient way to
      browse the proceedings onscreen during the conference.
      Navigation and full-text search are surprisingly fast.  We also
      included hyperlinks and bookmarks.  For example, one can jump to
      a paper by clicking its name in the program or the table of
      contents.

   e. Individual PDF papers prepared for the CD-ROM and ACL Anthology
      are also graced with page numbers, citation stamps, and
      corrected margins.  This wasn't possible in past years, when
      those things were handled by the printer.

4. Coordination with the ACL Anthology.  We package up the papers for
   immediate submission to the ACL Anthology.  The automatically
   generated BibTeX entries include each paper or book's future URL in
   the Anthology.  We hope that this will make it possible to add
   papers to the Anthology at the time of the conference.

5. Scripting.  Because of 2. and 3. above, the publications pipeline
   now starts earlier (with START data) and ends later (with a PDF
   volume, anthology package, and copyright signature database, as
   well as CD-ROM, BibTeX, etc.).  To handle this, we substantially
   extended the suite of scripts that have been used in past years (by
   David Yarowsky and others).

6. Makefile.  A single makefile, rather than a human, now decides when
   and how to (re)run the various scripts.  It combines data from the
   authors (via START), the program chair, and the publications chair
   to produce the various intermediate files and outputs.  Using a
   makefile safely ensures that changes to input files are
   appropriately propagated to the outputs.

7. Instructions.  Except for the main session proceeedings, we handed
   off production responsibilities to the individual program chairs.
   We wrote step-by-step instructions so that each workshop program
   chair could easily produce a proceedings to his or her
   satisfaction.  A typical step is to edit some file, type "make
   such-and-such," and check the result.

We plan to make further improvements to the scripts, makefile,
and instructions before handing them off to future publications
chairs (starting with HLT-EMNLP 2005).  Two in particular are
worth mentioning:

8. The publications process is plagued by multiple agents editing the
   same files.  We believe we can improve the makefile to safely merge
   changes from different agents, a la CVS.

   For example, a script regenerates program.tex whenever the metadata
   are edited, but a human may also tinker with program.tex to adjust
   the formatting or content.  The scripts themselves may be both
   edited by the publications chair and customized by individual
   workshop chairs during the process.
 
9. We hope to write clear and detailed instructions for future
   publications chairs, including our suggestions for future
   improvements.  We'll include these instructions and a master
   makefile as part of our scripts package.  We hope they will be
   maintained in future along with the scripts (and our instructions
   to authors and workshop chairs).
 
While most of our suggestions for the future will appear in our
instructions for our successors, a few specific issues are of more
general interest:

a. FINANCIAL.  Rich Gerber has mentioned to several people that he
   will want to renegotiate terms for next year.  He threw in the
   workshops, poster/demo session, etc. for no extra cost.  But that
   meant he had to provide tech support for 10-15 different workshop
   chairs -- almost as much work as hosting many separate conferences.
   Doing all this for $400 total made him feel like "a bit of a
   chump."

   In our opinion, it would be reasonable to pay him more.  The START
   system has proved invaluable.  

b. COPYRIGHT.  The ACL Exec should consider changing the language of
   our copyright transfer agreement.  Some authors would like a
   clearer statement that they can post papers to the web.  Other
   authors would like to retain copyright altogether, granting ACL a
   non-exclusive license to redistribute the original work.

   Prof. Christina Bohannan of the U. Iowa Law School characterizes our
   current agreement as both vague and overly complex, and suggests this
   possibility (thanks to Marc Light):

   "The copyright holder permits ACL, and permits ACL to authorize third
   parties, to reproduce, distribute, perform, display, and otherwise use
   the copyrighted work without further permission from the author.  The
   permission granted to ACL shall be construed as a non-exclusive
   license and shall not otherwise affect the copyright holder's rights
   under the Copyright Act and other applicable law."

   She adds that a non-exclusive license (such as the above) is
   legally easier for ACL to acquire than a copyright transfer.  In
   other words, if ACL had to go to court, we would find it easier to
   prove that we had acquired such a license, e.g. on the basis of a
   single electronic signature.  (In fact, legally it would suffice to
   get the oral agreement of any one of the copyright holders.)

c. CENTRALIZED COMPUTING.  ACL should provide a machine (perhaps
   aclweb.org) to host publications activities.  This machine should
   provide three functions:

   * A CVS or Subversion repository that maintains a definitive
     version of all scripts, templates, and instructions.  At present,
     publications scripts are passed informally from one conference to
     another.  We had to solicit and consolidate fragmentary versions
     from several sources.  It is possible that we missed improvements
     made, for example, by the last EACL chair, whom we didn't contact.

   * Up-to-date and correctly configured software needed to run the
     scripts (pdflatex, GNU make, bash, certain Perl modules, and 
     perhaps a version-control system such as Subversion).

     Workshop program chairs and publications chairs should have
     access to this machine (with appropriate permissions) to produce
     their respective proceedings.  ssh access is the simplest
     solution.  Alternatively, someone could set up a specialized web
     interface that allowed them to run the scripts, edit selected
     text files, and view the PDF results.

     The reason for a centralized machine is that some publications
     chairs or workshop chairs may not have the needed software
     installed.  Obtaining the software can be tricky even with root
     permissions: we ourselves were unable to configure tetex-3.0
     correctly when building it from source, but the Cygwin
     distribution of tetex-3.0 worked out of the box.

     (The particular issue in this case was getting pdflatex to
     correctly retain embedded Nimbus fonts when concatenating PDF
     submissions.  Nimbus fonts are open-source replacements for PDF's
     default fonts; they are used in camera-ready submissions produced
     by the most recent versions of pdflatex.)

   * After running the scripts, workshop chairs should leave their
     results on the central machine, where the publications chair can
     find and modify the latest version.  Ideally, all edits should be
     version-controlled for safety.  
     
d. NUMBER OF CHAIRS.  The publications process is now closer to a
   turnkey system.  However, until it stabilizes, we recommend
   enlisting two publications co-chairs for future conferences, as for
   ACL'04 and ACL'05.  There are still more than enough software,
   policy, and hand-holding issues to keep two people busy.

The final production numbers for ACL'05 publications were as follows.  
     
Main Proceedings         $12,980 ($13.66 each)  950 books @ 660 pages
Companion Proceedings     $7,345 ($7.73 each)   950 books @ 328 pages
12 Workshop Proceedings  $12,980 ($12.07 each)  1075 books @ avg. 118 pages 
CD-ROMS                   $3,425                1000 CD-ROMS
--------------------------------
TOTAL                    $36,730

We thank Rich Gerber for setting up START for our needs; Omnipress for
their patience; the ACL Exec for allowing electronic copyright
signatures; Drago Radev and Owen Rambow for various suggestions; and
David Yarowsky and many other contributors for the publications scripts 
we inherited.

-Jason Eisner & Philipp Koehn

